>> Jafar Husain: Now that we've seen what
this observable is capable of, right,
let's see how it works.
>> Jafar Husain: So,
first let's take a look at the way
that we conventionally do.
It's just reactive programming, right?
Asynchronous reactive programming.
Let's take a look at the way that we
conventionally do reactive programming.
So, I've got a button and
I've got a handler for that button.
And as soon as the button is clicked once,
I just wanna unsubscribe.
So, in other words I wanna do something,
I wanna alert, print up an alert
box as soon as you click a button.
And then,
as soon as you click that button,
every other time,
I never wanna print the alert box again.
So, let's see how that works.
We'll add an event listener,
so I'm adding a function.
And then I remove that event listener the
very first time that handler is called,
but I also alert a message
that the button was clicked.
So I'm gonna run that,
gonna to click this button, okay.
And now every other time I click
the button, nothing happens.
So relatively simple stuff right,
this is the type of code that you write
when you write event driven code.
Where maybe you this is a good
example of something you might do
with window.onload for example, right?
You might subscribe a function to
on load and then do something once.
And then hopefully you remember to unhook
your event handler cuz technically that
would be a memory leak if
you didn't do that right?
You might if you, that's a common
mistake in programming if you leave your
event handler on on load, right.
You might accidentally in your closure be
holding onto a very big object that you
might've only needed temporarily.
That's one of the dangers if
you're working with closures.
If you happen to use an object inside of
a closure and then you don't free that
handler, that closure will hold onto
an object that might be big and expensive.
So it's always good practice to
unsubscribe from window.unload.
So now if we convert
a click to an observable,
we can see that we can do the exact
same thing in a slightly different way.
So we don't think about things in
terms of add event listener or
remove listener anymore.
We now know that observables are
collections just like arrays and we can
use all the same operators that you've
been using on arrays with observable.
And so one of those operators is forEach.
Adding an event listener is no
different than traversing a collection,
that's really what you're
doing at the heart.
So I will first adapt this button
click into an observable and
then I will just forEach over it.
This code is doing the exact
same thing as the previous code.
Now notice that when I forEach over
code I get the subscription object back.
And the subscription object
is just a way of me saying,
as the consumer of the data,
I don't want any more data.
So I can dispose of that
subscription object.
So I'm gonna forEach over and
the very first time I get a click,
this should say click.
I'm just going to dispose
of the subscriptions and
that means I will get no more messages.
So this should run the exact
same way as the last one.
So I click it.
Stopping Traversal, so that means
I've called subscription.dispose.
And now, nothing right?
So now hopefully we've seen
that events and observable,
you can accomplish the same thing, right?
By calling subscription.dispose.
Just a slightly different interface.
Instead of calling remove event listener,
you call subscription.dispose.
Now one of the very nice things about
observable that is not true of events
is that observables can end.
You remember yesterday we talked about
those two missing semantics that the gang
of four who wrote the design patterns
book left out of the observer pattern.
Now that we've added them to observable,
we can take advantage of
this notion of completion.
So instead of after getting one message
we as the consumer saying okay now
I wanna unsubscribe from the event.
What I want us to do is I want to
rather than unsubscribe from events or
by calling subscription.dispose
explicitly,
I want us to use operators to create
events that end when we want them to end.
So wouldn't be great if we could just say,
hey look, just take this event and
just fire one.
Just essentially, transform
the observable so that only fires once and
then immediately completes.
Here's the brilliance of an observable.
Which is that when it completes, when
you have an explicit completion message,
when that observable tells you it's done.
Is there any reason at all for
it to hold on to your event handler?
No, let's say I'm the observable and
she is the consumer.
She hands me an event handler and I push
her values one on next one, on next two,
on next three and then I say on completed.
I've just told you that I'm never ever
gonna send you another value, right?
Is there any reason in all for
me to hold on to the observer,
to those three event
handlers that you gave me?
No, I can just free them.
That's what's great about an observable,
it cleans up after itself.
That's why when an observable
completes and it says I'm done.
You don't need to go along and
say, yeah remove event listener.
It's already freed your event listener for
you.
That's the difference in the way that you
think about DOM events and observables.
That's why we don't worry about
unsubscribing from event by calling
subscription.dispose, that's
just machinery under the hood.
We're not gonna use that API directly.
We are gonna take the observables and
we're gonna take operators that I'm gonna
teach you today that cause them
to end when we want them to end.
And then we can just be 100% sure
that they're not holding on to our
callbacks anymore, because they've told us
that they're never gonna call us again.
So this is how we avoid memory leaks,
memory leaks are a serious
problem in large user interfaces.
Where you're subscribing up to
events all over the place, and
you got to remember to
unhook from those events.
It leads to what we call
state machine like code.
You need to build a state machine.
I need to remember if I'm hooked up
to the event or whether I haven't.
Let's go back to that mouse drag example.
I want you guys to imagine for a moment
how you would have written the mouse drag
example if you didn't have observable.
What would you do?
You'd probably listen for
a mouse down, right?
And then when you got the mouse down,
your event handler would fire.
And then you'd hook up to the mouse move.
But now you have to remember that you've
hooked up to the mouse move, right?
So that when the mouse up comes along,
you can unhook.
So you're writing code that's like
using variables to keep track
of what's going on, right.
So okay, well, I'll hook up to the mouse
move and I'll hook up to the mouse up.
And if the mouse up fires I need
to remember to unhook from the,
I need to remember to rehook
up to the mouse down.
You write this code it's all kind of
like this do this and do that, right.
It's very easy to forget,
in a particular circumstance,
to forget to unhook your event handler.
But when we write code like this
you'll find we do it declaratively so
it's much easier.
So there is an operator that you can write
over array we never bothered to write over
array, but it's very trivial called take.
Take is something that you can
apply to any observable and
simply say I just want one of these.
So what that will do is it
will take an observable,
which remember this observable
is based on click, and
observables based on DOM events
will never say onCompleted.
Why is that, why is that observables based
on that we've adapted from a DOM event
will never give us an onCompleted message?
>> Speaker 2: Because it will
keep listening to the DOM event forever.
>> Jafar Husain: Right,
cuz DOM events don't have this
notion of completion right.
DOM events just go on.
That was the thing that was left out
of the pattern twenty years ago.
They just thought,
who needs to say we're done, right.
So if you take a DOM event and
you directly adopted into an observable,
the observable never say onCompleted.
But we can make the observable
say onCompleted by
applying take one to it, right?
So now instead of, back to
the example of window.onload, right?
A good programmer remembers to remove
their onload handler after it fires.
We know it's only gonna fire once, right.
But we've got to go and
remember to unhook that handler.
Otherwise we could leak memory cuz of that
closure could be holding on to some data.
Well that's kind of ugly code.
You've got to nest your remove event
listener inside of your event handler, and
it's just ugly.
Why don't we just convert window.onload
into an observable and then do take one?
What that's gonna do is instead of just
calling onNext the one time onload would
have called your event handler.
Now it's gonna call onNext,
onCompleted, right, cuz it's take one.
What take does it take an observable and
says, look,
you just want to take this many number of
elements, and then you want to complete.
And as soon as that
observable calls onCompleted
it's gonna free our event handler for us.
So we don't need to go back and
add or remove event listener.
So if I take this button clicks and
do take one.
Notice I'm not even,
I'm just ignoring the subscription object,
I'm not even using it directly.
I almost never call subscription.dispose
when I write RX code
because I've got take until and
I've got take and I've got switch latest.
So I almost never actually explicitly
unsubscribe from an observable.
If we run this,
we'll find that it does the exact same
thing as the two previous examples.
So we get a button click, and
I get no more button clicks.
Because it's unhooked the event
handler under the hood for me.
Because I've told it to limit
itself to only one element.
So this is the power of giving
observable the same semantics
that are on the iterator pattern.
Now that an observable can tell us it's
done, well that would be the logical time
for the observable just,
you know free our subscription.
Why hold on to a call back if
you're never gonna call it again?